+++
title = "Bellbird Wall, Close Call"
date = "2016-03-28"
draft = false

tags = []

[header]
image = "bellbird-1.png"
caption = ""

+++



Last Saturday, on 26th March 2016, a friend and fellow climber was injured while attempting a multipitch route near pulpit rock in Blackheath. This is a personal account of the events that unfolded. 

The plan was to leave Sydney at 7am, bright and early, and do either some multipitching or canyoning. We could have done one of the Bowens Ck South canyons or Butterbox canyon or either Whymper or Bellbird wall multipitch routes. We had agreed the night before that we would just decide the next morning on the way to the Blue Mountains. That morning a unanimous decision was made to do some multipitch climbing. None of us had even bothered bringing any canyoning gear. We decided that we would do Bellbird wall since Wen Jun had already done it before and had looked up the track notes on the night before. So we felt confident that we could just do it without having to do much planning ourselves, completely relying on Wen Jun’s memory. Even though half of our party of four had never even done any multipithing, we thought we would be fine since the grades of the pitches were well within our ability. 

I ended up getting picked up at about 8:30am. On the way there Manon and I decided to look up instructions for setting up multipitch anchors on our phones while Bayu drove the car. When Wen Jun realised what we were doing he chuckled - “that’s reassuring!”, he said. 

We finally got to the car park, or at least so we thought, at about 11am. We decided to put all our gear together to see if we had enough. Wen Jun remembered that we needed sixteen quickdraws. Between the four of us we had just enough, or maybe one less, for two sets. We figured it would be okay. Manon needed an extra carabiner and another sling so I gave my spares to her. Wen Jun also gave some of his gear to Bayu and Manon. We decided that Wen Jun and I would climb together and Bayu and Manon would make up the other pair. I decided to leave my bag behind since I didn’t want to climb with a big backpack, especially while leading the slab pitch because Wen Jun “hated” slabs. I gave him my jumper to carry and we decided to share the three litres of water he was carrying. After a quick tutorial from Wen Jun on how to set up an anchor and top belay after leading a pitch, we thought we were all set. We propped our helmets on, pulled up our heavy, gear laden harnesses and started walking down in thongs and climbing shoes, only to realise that we were in the wrong car park. 

We arrived at the abseil anchors at midday. Wen Jun remembered the anchors were a short bush-bash to the left of the walking track at the twelve drain mark. We joined the two ropes together with an overhand knot and Wen Jun set the abseil up. He went down first with a prussik backup and fireman belayed Manon and Bayu who followed. I decided to go last. This is when I almost had my fatal accident. I clipped into the safety and shimmied around the corner to the abseil anchor. At this point I was on my tippy-toes and my heels were hanging over the edge with a hundred and fifty metre drop underneath. I pulled up the rope to set up my belay device but the weight of the 100m of rope hanging below made it hard to manage. Normally I would pull up the length I need and step on it to keep it from falling back down and have two hands free to set up my belay device. This time I wasn’t in a comfortable enough situation to do that so I just pulled up the rope, forming a bight, held it in one hand and proceeded to set up my belay device. After checking, I thought that the ropes held my weight and unclipped my safety. Wen Jun replied with “ON BELAY” to my “ABSEILING”. I noticed it when I bent my knees, about to hop off the ledge. I had only fed one of the ropes through my belay device instead of two, and that too the wrong one. If I had put my weight on it, I would have plummeted straight down and no amount of fireman-belaying could have stopped me. With a curse word I straightened myself up and reached around to clip-in my safety. I could feel my heartbeat in my neck. I redid the belay device and started abseiling. I could not stop shaking on the way down. 

After fifty metres of abseiling, I came off the abseil onto a quadrant shaped ledge. There were loose rocks everywhere on the floor. There were a set of anchor bolts on one end of the ledge facing north, directly at the Grose valley. This was the bottom anchor for the second pitch. There was another set of anchor bolts, just off the ledge on the other end, facing West, along the wall. This was the top anchor for the first pitch which started about 50m West of the ledge. Wen Jun, knowing that pitch one starting ledge was to the West, thought it better to abseil off that end. He also wasn’t sure if there would be a ledge on the other side. Not wanting to be stranded, dangling hundred metres above the valley floor, we all agreed with his decision. He then fed the ropes through an extendable quickdraw on the top pitch-one anchor to keep it from swinging, and abseiled down again with a prussik. At the bottom, about fifty metres below us, he realised that in fact the ledge did go around to the other side making it okay to abseil directly down instead of the West end of the ledge. He screamed trying to relay the information but was incomprehensible to us due to the windy conditions. 

This time I got on the rope second, ready to abseil. I checked my set up multiple times before committing to it. I walked around to the other end and unhooked the ropes from the extendable quickdraw, however, fearing that I might swing without this quickdraw, I could not do it. Manon was much more brave. She convinced me to go ahead in my place claiming that it would be easier for Wen Jun to control her swing due to her being lighter. After setting up her belay device, she walked down to the ledge and just flicked the rope down to the front, reducing the swing. I facepalmed at my inability to do something so simple. On her way down, however, I noticed that the rock the rope was going over on the ledge was loose. It would wobble, threatening to come off every time Manon would lower herself. To keep it from coming off, Bayu and I pushed down on the rope so it was running flat along the ledge. Luckily for us Manon finished abseiling and the rock stayed put. I went next, flicking the rope to the West of the rock so it wasn’t going over it anymore. Bayu followed. 

When we reached the bottom it was about 2pm. Wen Jun tried pulling the rope down but it would not budge. Turns out by placing the rope to the West of the rock I had jammed the rope between the rock and the ledge. Of course we did not know this at the time. I made the joke that since I hadn’t had any major incidents in the past on any of my trips, statistically this was bound to happen. I wish I hadn’t made that joke. I knew that if we were unable to free the rope then the rescue party wouldn’t be able to reach us until the day after since I had instructed my girlfriend to call the emergency services if she hadn’t heard from me until the morning after. After much consideration and fruitless attempts to unstuck the rope, Wen Jun decided to prussik up the rope. Him and I were the only ones with prussiks but I did not even offer to go in his stead, justifying in my head that he was more experienced, that he would be quicker. It took him around 45 minutes to prussik fifty metres up to the top and figure out the problem. He placed the rope over a smooth rock and started abseiling down again. On the way down he stepped on a juggy rock and it came loose. Wen Jun screamed “Rock falling”.

Bayu and I were sitting down with our backs facing the slightly concave wall when we heard the call. Manon was walking towards us from around the corner. We were all wearing helmets. She was about one and half metres from me when it happened. Hearing the call, she leaned into the wall tucking her chin in and the rock, which Wen Jun described later as being the size of his head, fell directly on her back and bounced off the ledge. Upon the impact Manon fell over in our laps and screamed continuously for about a minute. It felt like she could not stop screaming because of the intensity of the pain. Bayu and I held Manon muttering consoling words knowing that none of it helped. 

When she stopped screaming, Manon momentarily closed her eyes, probably in an attempt to calm down. Bayu and I at this point were worried that maybe the rock had hit her head as well, so fearing a concussion we tried to keep her talking and asked her to keep her eyes open. Bayu had attended a first aid training course a couple of weeks earlier. He directed me to fetch his emergency blanket from his bag. I realised at this point that I had left both my emergency blanket and my head torch in the car. I kicked myself for it but carried on with the task at hand. We supported Manon’s head and back and rolled her on her side and slid the emergency blanket under her. We then rolled her over to inspect her injuries. She had a massive bruise just underneath her left shoulder blade with some superficial lacerations. Luckily the rock had missed her spine but at this point we couldn’t be sure of anything. There was also some swelling on the left side of her traps. 

After another minute or two Manon had regained some movement and decided, despite being strongly discouraged, to sit up. Wen Jun finally came down and let out a sigh of relief when he saw all three of us sitting there. I realised how nerve-wrecking it must have been for him to be up there hearing those screams and not knowing what had happened. We managed to pull the ropes down this time and now had two sets of sixty metre ropes to climb with. Manon at this point was adamant that she was fit enough to climb, but the rest of us knew that it was the adrenaline talking. So we decided that Wen Jun and I would lead the three pitches as fast as we could and call for help when we reach the top, and Bayu would stay and look after Manon. Wen Jun and I gave all our warm gear and food and traversed around to the start of the first pitch.

It was after 4pm when I started leading the first slabby 45m pitch, graded 16. About fifteen metres up, I noticed that my legs were trembling because of recent events. I tried not to think about it and focussed on the climbing. Soon I was so focussed that nothing deterred me, not even the nearly hundred metre exposure. Wen Jun led the second pitch which was also the same length, had an overhangy bit and was graded 17. I marvelled at his ability to lead past the exposed overhang while I seconded up. 

When I emerged at the top of the second pitch, we heard someone call out, “Travellers! Are you okay?”. I replied immediately, “Yes! But we have an injured friend about a hundred metres below us”. Turns out Bayu had a phone on him and although it had no reception, he was able to make an emergency call. Wen Jun, was aware of this but had neglected to mention it to me. I breathed a sigh of relief and continued on with the third pitch. This pitch was only 15m and was graded 15 but was the most interesting of all. It started with an off-width traverse at the end of which you swing around to the jug on the outside of the arete on the end. I could see the whole 100m wall looking down from there. The rest of the route was fairly unimpressive. 

When I summitted at the top, there were four emergency workers already there. Soon there was also an ambulance helicopter circling around the valley. I looked to my right and Pulpit rock was packed with tourists more interested in the rescue operation than the majestic Grose valley. Due to the noise of the helicopter, I was unable to communicate with Wen Jun so we were instructed by the rescue party to stay put. Wen Jun seconded up as soon as it was quiet enough. We sat up there, teary eyed, as we witnessed the paramedics abseil down and the helicopter returned to drop a stretcher and more emergency workers. Wen Jun pulled himself together and started documenting the whole operation with photos. 

It must have been just after 6pm at this point. We had climbed the three pitches in under two hours, the rescue crew were already here but we still had no idea what was happening down there and if Manon was okay. When asked, the emergency workers replied that they were still in the process of assessing Manon’s injuries and that they did not want to move her until they were absolutely sure it was safe. Manon and Bayu were still on a ledge, fifty metres above the valley floor making it difficult for the helicopter to safely winch her out. Once the rescue workers had finished assessing Manon, she was moved onto the valley floor where there was an opening big enough to carry out the rescue. Unfortunately, however, by the time they had done that, the weather had closed in and the night had fallen. So the paramedics on site were advised by the helicopter crew that Manon would be extracted on first light on the morning after. Manon was given a sleeping bag and Bayu was given a thin blanket, and they spent the night in the Grose valley alongside the rescue crew of four. 

While all this was being decided by the police rescue inspector and the paramedics inspector, Wen Jun and I had walked back to the car and had dived into the process of informing all our friends and family what had happened. Manon had instructed me to give her dad a call. She had informed me the whereabouts of her phone and the passcode, so I scrolled down her contacts and tapped on “Dad”. To my surprise the phone was answered by her younger sister. After hesitating a little I asked if I could speak to Manon’s dad. Bayu told me later than Manon’s sister had picked up that something was wrong and had started crying immediately. Manon’s dad arrived with her young siblings at around 8pm. He was quite patient while we recounted the day’s events and remained rational. The two inspectors also came and updated all of us on the status of the rescue operation and Manon’s condition. Manon had somehow avoided getting any major injuries, no major fractures, no concussion, nor any back injuries. Her family seemed very content with the news. Knowing there was not much more we could have done, Wen Jun and I decided to head home at around 9pm. We visited Manon in the hospital the next day when she was already making her silly jokes. 

If asked I would summarize the trip as a disaster with a happy ending. I can’t help but wonder how lucky we were. All of us agreed that this had been a trip of learning. We were a little overconfident and underprepared but at the same time I accept that no amount of preparedness could have saved the accident from happening. That is not to say that there is not much point being prepared. On the contrary, I think one should be as prepared as they can be, because when the inevitable happens, you don’t wanna have any regrets about things you could have changed by being prepared. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the rescue workers who saved the day. I would also like to extend all my love, appreciation and thanks to Wen Jun, Bayu and Manon who were all skillful, brave, rational and selfless in the face of adversity. You guys are the best! :smile:
